The French and Indian War (1754–1763) was a conflict between Great Britain and France in North America. The war was fought primarily along the frontiers between New France and the British colonies, from the Province of Virginia in the south to Newfoundland in the north. The conflict arose from disputes over land in the Ohio River valley. British colonists wanted to settle in the region, while the French wanted to maintain control over their lucrative fur trade. The war was part of a larger global conflict known as the Seven Years' War.

The war began in 1754 when a young George Washington led a Virginia militia against French forces in the Ohio Territory. The French had built Fort Duquesne at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, which the British considered a threat to their expansion westward. Early in the war, the French and their Native American allies achieved several victories, including the defeat of British General Edward Braddock near Fort Duquesne in 1755.

The tide of the war turned in 1758 when the British began to achieve significant victories. The British captured Fort Frontenac and Fort Duquesne, and in 1759, they won the decisive Battle of the Plains of Abraham near Quebec City, where both the British commander James Wolfe and the French commander Louis-Joseph de Montcalm were killed. The fall of Quebec marked the beginning of the end for French power in North America.

The war officially ended with the Treaty of Paris in 1763, which resulted in France ceding most of its North American territories to Britain. France lost Canada and all of its territory east of the Mississippi River, except for New Orleans. Spain, which had allied with France, ceded Florida to Britain but received Louisiana Territory from France as compensation. The war had profound consequences for the relationship between Britain and its American colonies, as the British government sought to recoup war expenses through increased taxation, which would later contribute to the American Revolution. 